
--- PAGE 1 RAW ---
1
Capacity of All Nine Models of Channel
Output Feedback for the Two-user Interference
Channel
Achaleshwar Sahai, Vaneet Aggarwal, Melda Yuksel and Ashutosh Sabharwal
Abstract
In this paper, we study the impact of different channel output feedback architectures on the capacity of the
two-user interference channel. For a two-user interference channel, a feedback link can exist between receivers and
transmitters in 9 canonical architectures (see Fig. 2), ranging from only one feedback link to four feedback links. We
derive the exact capacity region for the symmetric deterministic interference channel and the constant-gap capacity
region for the symmetric Gaussian interference channel for all of the 9 architectures. We show that for a linear
deterministic symmetric interference channel, in the weak interference regime, all models of feedback, except the
one, which has only one of the receivers feeding back to its own transmitter, have the identical capacity region. When
only one of the receivers feeds back to its own transmitter, the capacity region is a strict subset of the capacity region
of the rest of the feedback models in the weak interference regime. However, the sum-capacity of all feedback models
is identical in the weak interference regime. Moreover, in the strong interference regime all models of feedback with
at least one of the receivers feeding back to its own transmitter have the identical sum-capacity. For the Gaussian
interference channel, the results of the linear deterministic model follow, where capacity is replaced with approximate
capacity.
I. INTRODUCTION
The two-user interference channel has been studied in the literature since 1970’s to understand one of the
main performance limits of multiuser communication networks [3–9]. Feedback in interference channels has been
considered in order to achieve a possible improvement in data rates. A large body of work on interference channels
[10–13] explores feedback strategies, where each receiver sends channel output feedback to its own transmitter.
More generalized form of feedback in a two-user interference channel is considered in [14–17]. Recent work in [18,
19] particularly analyzes the capacity region of two-user deterministic and Gaussian interference channels, where
each of the receivers send channel output feedback to its own transmitter. The authors of [20] consider the case
of rate limited channel output feedback and investigate its capacity region, where each user feeds back to its own
transmitter.
The conventional model of channel output feedback in a two-user interference channel has each receiver feeding
back to its intended transmitter [18–20]. However, several different feedback architectures are possible based on
the presence or absence of feedback links between both receivers and both transmitters. The feedback architecture
can be asymmetric if feedback resources available to different transmitter-receiver pairs are different. Consider two
mobile terminals in two neighboring cells, communicating with their corresponding base stations. If the mobile user
in the ﬁrst cell is closer to its base-station, then its base-station can support a strong feedback link. At the same
time, if the mobile station in the neighboring cell is farther away from its base-station, it will experience a poor or
possibly no feedback channel. In such a case, we say only one direct-link feedback is available. In another scenario,
suppose one of the receivers in the interference channel is capable of sending feedback to both the transmitters,
whereas the other receiver does not send any feedback. Then it would be a case of single receiver broadcasting
feedback. The conventional model of channel output feedback is insufﬁcient to understand the effect of feedback on
the capacity region of the interference channel. We need to consider different feedback architectures, which forms
the focus of our study.
In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive study of the capacity region of all feedback architectures in two-user
linear deterministic [21, 22] and Gaussian interference channels. The feedback architectures that we study are all
A. Sahai and A. Sabharwal are with the department of ECE, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA (email: {as27,ashu}@rice.edu). V.
Aggarwal is with AT&T Labs-Research, Florham Park, NJ 07932, USA (email: vaneet@research.att.com). M. Yuksel is with TOBB University of
Economics and Technology, Ankara, Turkey (email: yuksel@etu.edu.tr). The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE Information
Theory Workshop, Taormina, Italy, 2009 [1] and at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Austin, Texas, 2010 [2]. A. Sahai
and A. Sabharwal were partially supported by NSF grant CNS-1012921 and a grant from Texas Instruments.
arXiv:1104.4805v3  [cs.IT]  25 Jan 2013

--- PAGE 2 RAW ---
2
parametrized by the feedback links they support. In a two-user interference channel, there can be as many as 4
possible feedback links, i.e., one feedback link from each receiver to each transmitter. Therefore, excluding the
case of no feedback links, a total of 24 −1 = 15 feedback models are possible. Barring the symmetrical cases,
9 canonical feedback models are possible, which are shown in Fig. 2. In this work, we study the capacity region
of all the 9 feedback models shown in Fig. 2. In order to gain insights about good communication schemes that
apply to the different feedback models, we ﬁrst analyze them under the symmetric linear deterministic model of
interference. Then, we extend the results to the Gaussian interference channel, deriving the approximate capacity
region by developing outer and inner bounds, which are within constant bits of one another.
In this paper, the comprehensive study of capacity region of different feedback architectures leads to three main
results. The ﬁrst main result of the paper is that for a linear symmetric deterministic interference channel, all 9
canonical feedback models except one (with only one direct-link feedback, shown in Fig. 2(d)) have the identical
capacity region in the weak interference regime. Moreover, the capacity region of single direct link feedback model
is a strict subset of the capacity region of the rest of the feedback models. The ﬁrst main result extends to the
Gaussian channel case where all models of feedback, except single direct-link feedback model, have the same
approximate capacity region which is within constant bits from their respective outer-bounds.
The second main result of the paper is that for a linear symmetric deterministic interference channel, all feedback
models have the identical sum-capacity in the weak interference regime. This result is particularly interesting because
if sum-capacity is the performance metric, any one feedback link is sufﬁcient to achieve the maximum feedback
sum-capacity.
The third main result of the paper is that to achieve maximum feedback sum-capacity, availability of one direct
feedback link is sufﬁcient for all regimes of interference, i.e., the sum-capacity with single direct feedback link
is identical to the sum-capacity with all four feedback links for all regimes of interference. The second and third
main results also hold for the Gaussian interference channel, if the term sum-capacity is replaced with approximate
sum-capacity.
We show the above three results by deriving exact (deterministic)/approximate (Gaussian) capacity regions of all
of the 9 canonical feedback models. We ﬁnd two new outer-bounds and propose two new achievability schemes.
For the deterministic channel model, the achievability scheme attains all points on the outer bound, whereas in the
Gaussian model, the inner bound is a constant number of bits away from the outer bound (2.59 bits/Hz for feedback
models in Fig. 2(a), 2(b), and 2(c), 4.59 bits/Hz for Fig. 2(d) and Fig. 2(e)). The achievability for all the feedback
models is derived in two steps. First, an achievable strategy is proposed for two atomic feedback models: one with
single direct feedback link and another with single cross feedback link (where one of the receivers feeds back to its
interfering transmitter). Then, using a combination of the achievable strategies for the two atomic feedback models,
the achievable rate region of the rest of the feedback models is derived.
The ﬁrst achievable strategy we propose for single direct feedback link is based on using a Han-Kobayashi type
message splitting [23]. Our coding strategy is similar to the one employed in two-user interference channel without
feedback in the sense that the coding scheme splits the message at each transmitter into two parts, private and
common. However, the coding strategy differs in the transmission of the common message. The common message
generated at the second transmitter is transmitted twice, once by the transmitter, where it is generated, and once
from the other transmitter, where it is known via feedback. The purpose of the re-transmission of the common
message depends on the regime of interference. In the strong interference regime, feedback offers gain, if it allows
the common message to travel from its source to destination via an alternate independent path of higher capacity
(than the direct link). In the weak interference regime, the ﬁrst transmitter can perform block-Markov encoding
based on the common message of the second transmitter. Block-Markov encoding of messages based on the common
message of the second transmitter, helps the ﬁrst receiver to resolve some of the past interference, without causing
any apparent interference at the second receiver.
The above achievable strategy turns out to be insufﬁcient to show the exact/approximate capacity region for
deterministic/Gaussian interference channel with feedback models shown in Fig. 2(e). The second achievable
strategy, for single cross-link feedback model, is based on block-Markov encoding of messages at the second
transmitter and dirty paper encoding at the ﬁrst transmitter. Since the second transmitter performs block-Markov
encoding, and cross-link feedback is available to the ﬁrst transmitter, the ﬁrst transmitter can learn about the
“future” interference that its receiver will face. Based on the channel output feedback from the second receiver, the
ﬁrst transmitter performs dirty paper encoding to protect its receiver from future interference. Using this second
achievable strategy in combination with the ﬁrst achievable strategy, the capacity region for cross-link feedback is

--- PAGE 3 RAW ---
3
proven.
Relations to similar work: The coding strategy in [16, 18, 24] also employ a Han-Kobayashi type message
splitting. In [18], the feedback model has each transmitter receiving feedback from its respective receiver, and
while the message is split into only two parts, private and common, only a part of the common message of the
other transmitter is re-transmitted in subsequent blocks. Our coding scheme for the single direct-link feedback
re-transmits all the common message of only one of the transmitters. In [16, 24], the message is split into four
parts: two common and two private and feedback induces source cooperation by making sources learn the common
message of the other transmitter. In our coding scheme too, the purpose of re-transmitting the common message is
to induce cooperation/allow routing.
We would also like to remark that the work on generalized feedback in [14–17], as well as the work on source
cooperation by two sources overhearing each other’s messages over a noisy channel in [24] are closely related
to our work. The outer and inner bounds derived in [14, 16] and [24], concurrent to our work in [1, 2], can be
particularized to obtain the sum-capacity result shown in Lemma 4.4. In this work, we comprehensively study
the exact and approximate capacity regions for linear deterministic and Gaussian interference channel models
respectively for all canonical feedback models.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the Gaussian channel model and its deter-
ministic approximation. Section II also presents all the different feedback models that will be studied in the paper.
Section III is a preview of the main results and insights regarding them. Section IV and V present the capacity
regions (exact and approximate respectively) for the linear deterministic and Gaussian interference channels for all
models of feedback. Section VI concludes the paper with discussions.
II. CHANNEL MODEL AND PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we describe the two-user symmetric Gaussian and deterministic interference channel models and
the 9 canonical feedback architectures that will be used throughout the paper.
A. Channel Model
A two-user interference channel consists of two transmitters, T1 and T2, and two receivers D1 and D2. Each
receiver Du is interested in the message transmitted by transmitter Tu for u ∈{1, 2}, while the message from the
other transmitter is interference.
The two-user symmetric Gaussian interference channel, shown in Fig. 1(b) is a special case of the two-user inter-
ference channel, where the noise at both the receivers have zero mean, unit variance complex Gaussian distribution.
Let Wu denote the message Tu transmits in N successive transmissions, where Wu ∈Wu = {1, 2 . . . 2NRu},
N ∈N and Ru ∈R. The function fuj : Wu 7→Xuj denotes the encoding that maps the message to the input
over the channel, Xuj ∈C, j ∈[1, 2, . . . N]. Let XN
u = [Xu1, Xu2, . . . XuN] and Y N
u = [Yu1, Yu2, . . . YuN], where
Xuj (Yuj) denotes the signal transmitted (received) at the jth time instant at Tu (Du). Then, when gij ∈C are the
channel gains, the received signals at the two receivers are given by
Y1j
=
g11X1j + g21X2j + Z1j
Y2j
=
g22X2j + g12X1j + Z2j.
The decoding function hu maps the output Y N
u
to a symbol c
Wu ∈Wu (hu : Y N
u 7→c
Wu).
In this paper, we will focus on the symmetric Gaussian channel, where the direct gains are equal, g11 = g22 = gd,
the cross gains are equal, g12 = g21 = gc, and the noises Z1j and Z2j are both distributed as CN(0, 1). Moreover,
the transmitted power is constrained such that E(|X1j|2) ≤P1, E(|X2j|2) ≤P2, and P1 = P2 = P, where the E(.)
denotes the expected value of a random variable. We also deﬁne the signal to noise ratio (SNR) and the interference
to noise ratio (INR) as
SNR = |gd|2P, INR = |gc|2P.
The regime of interference is weak, when SNR ≥INR and strong when SNR < INR. Moreover, the ratio of INR
to SNR in dB scale will be denoted by
α = log(INR)
log(SNR).
(1)
The deterministic interference channel [21] is a good approximation of the Gaussian interference channel, when
signal and interference powers are much larger compared to the noise. We will use the deterministic approximation
